docs: Refactor the clustering documentation (#5589)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/configure/clustering/configure-alloy.md

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/configure/clustering/configure-alloy/
description: Learn how to enable clustering in Grafana Alloy
menuTitle: Configure Alloy
title: Configure Alloy for clustering
weight: 100
---

# Configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} for clustering

You can enable clustering in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} with Helm chart settings or command-line flags.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
Cluster mode in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} allows instances to discover each other and form a cluster.
To distribute workload, you must also [enable clustering in individual components][distribute-workload].
{{< /admonition >}}

## Configure clustering with a Helm chart

You can enable clustering when {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} is installed on Kubernetes with a [Helm chart][install-helm].

### Before you begin

> For multi-replica clustering on Kubernetes, Grafana Alloy recommends setting `controller.type` to `statefulset`.

Reviewer: The recommendation feels like it should have some kind of justification or reasoning. I don't love my rewrite but something like this?

```suggestion
For multi-replica clustering on Kubernetes, {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} typically recommends setting `controller.type` to `statefulset` to reduce the resource impact on a cluster of having a `daemonset` deploy {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on each node.
```

Author: Ah.. I missed that one in my cleanup. :-(

how about something like this:

> For multi-replica clustering on Kubernetes, set `controller.type` to `statefulset`.

This removes the `recommends` part... 

Then I asked Claude to help explain and several iterations ended up with this:

> A StatefulSet gives each Pod a stable network identity for peer discovery.
> It also lets you choose how many {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} Pods to run instead of running one Pod on every node.
> Use a DaemonSet only when your configuration must collect node-local data.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think that works. 👍

| -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--cluster.enabled`        | Enables clustering mode.                                    |
| `--cluster.join-addresses` | Comma-separated list of addresses of cluster nodes to join. |
| `--cluster.discover-peers` | Key-value tuples used to discover peers dynamically.        |

### Example

```bash
alloy run config.alloy \
  --cluster.enabled \
  --cluster.join-addresses=alloy-1:7946,alloy-2:7946
```

### Optional flags

You can customize clustering behavior with additional flags:

| Flag                             | Description                                      | Default    |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ---------- |
| `--cluster.advertise-address`    | Address to advertise to other cluster nodes.     | `""`       |
| `--cluster.advertise-interfaces` | Network interfaces to use for advertisement.     | `eth0,en0` |
| `--cluster.enable-tls`           | Enables TLS for cluster communication.           | `false`    |
| `--cluster.max-join-peers`       | Number of peers to join from the discovered set. | `5`        |

> | `--cluster.name`                 | Name to prevent mixing clusters.                 | `""`       |

Reviewer: Not sure on this one, but I feel like "mixing clusters" isn't a clear description of the behavior.

```suggestion
| `--cluster.name`                 | Shared name to prevent nodes from joining the wrong cluster(s).                 | `""`       |
```

Author: What about this:

> Cluster name that nodes must share to join the same cluster.
